Hearing today, uh, that, um, ask not to mention, um,
things that currently before the courts for adjudication,
but otherwise, uh, the time is yours to, um, submit.
And if you wish to leave time for questions,
please feel free to do so.
Welcome.
Thank you, Joseph. Um, my name is Ru O'Brien.
I am one of the law reform coordinators
for community law centers, ro, which is the peak body
for all the 24 community law centers.
I'm also a solicitor at the Community Law Otago Law Center,
um, joined by Jack we,
who is a barrister at Community Law Centers.
Ro instructed for the purpose
of the intervention in the MSD verse B case, uh,
and Jordan Renie,
who is a solicitor at the community law Wellington Law
Center, and has a number of clients
who are directly affected by this bill
and also sat as co-chair on that case as well.
I'll let Jordan start us off.
Kiata. Um, at Community Law, Wellington
and Heart Valley, we have many clients
who are affected by this bill.
For almost all of these clients,
their a CC injury is offensive claim.
That means that they've endured sexual assault or abuse
and for some while they were children.
Some of these clients are also survivors of abuse and state
and faith-based care.
These clients have only received a CC weekly compensation
back payments because they had been unable to work due
to the mental impact of their sexual assault or abuse.
Following the introduction of this bill, a client said to me
that they felt like they'd been punished.
Another said it's been one of the worst experiences
of their lives, and
that they wish they had never started the a PP process.
Process. And that's because in order to get a PC cover,
they had to undergo invasive psychiatric assessments,
which was often retraumatizing in itself.
If they're then forced to repay supplementary assistance
payments on top of their in debts that you get with
with poverty, some clients will be left
with such a pitiful amount
that it simply does not compensate
for the compounding trauma.
They experience obtaining a CC cover.
Some clients have sensitive claims are receiving
80% of minimum wage.
One client says that with today's living costs,
she is lucky if she has $20 left over
after paying bills, food and rent.
The nominal lump sum that she received from the back payment
was spent actually on higher rent
because during that time, her mental health was so bad
that she was unable to live with other people.
These clients are not living a life
of luxury far from it.
We urge the select committee to ensure that this side
of the story is portrayed in parliament
because so many people affected
by this bill have been deprived of the opportunity
to voice about the consequences that this has on them.
I'll now pass over to
Thank you Jordan.
Uh, Rupert's gonna talk about some things we think, uh,
could be improved about this bill if it is passed.
But before we do that, we just wanted to speak very quickly
to situate the bill in the legal context
and understand what the Social Security Appeal authority in
the high court actually decided.
Because what we are concerned here
with supplementary assistance, which is paid
because a person requires it at the time to meet needs
and which is passes through to, to pay for the firewood
or pay for the accommodation that the,
that the person requires.
It's not money that that anyone retains.
And what the authority said was, so far as we are concerned
with the main benefit
and any weekly compensation, you get an arrears from a CC,
it's entirely appropriate.
Those cancel each other out.
You shouldn't be able to keep the main benefit
and get, get weekly compensation,
which performs the same, the same function.
And that way the legislation operates equitably, equitably,
and fairly and ensures that there's no double dipping.
But what the authority said is
that supplementary assistance is different.
It's not captured by the legislative scheme for, uh,
removing double dipping.
And for a CC, uh, sorry for MSD to effectively
recalculate someone's historical entitlement
as if they had been receiving a CC
when in fact they weren't would be unfair
and inequitable.
And, and what I think is important to keep in mind is
that MSD didn't challenge that determination.
They accepted for the purpose of the appeal that simply
reconstruct using their discretion
to reconstruct someone's historical entitlement to, uh,
supplementary assistance wasn't appropriate In a case like
the one before the court,
what they said was Section 2 5 2 did that it automatically,
and there was no real discretion involved.
And that's the decision that the high, the argument
that the high court rejected.
The high court said that the legislation makes quite a clear
distinction between main benefit
and supplementary assistance.
And it would be unfair
to retrospectively impose significant debts on people
through no fault of their own.
And so we think it's really important to, uh,
to, to, to challenge any perception
that this bill is about preventing double dipping
or treating beneficiaries in different categories fairly,
because a person who's fought for years to get their a CC
and requires assistance in the meantime
is not in the same position as somebody
who received a c when they were entitled to it.
And so, uh, in, in our submission, the bill doesn't,
is not about ensuring fairness.
It actually perpetuates unfairness
Kia, um, as Jordan
and Jack have explained.
The bill is unfair and unjust
and it should be rejected in its entirety in our position.
Um, but what I will do to, to finish us off is
recommend some potential changes to the bill that could, um,
make it a little bit more fair in the circumstances.
Um, we raise special concerns about the
retrospective of this bill.
It goes back and dismantles a high court decision.
Um, it goes back and retrospectively validates a course
of policy that has been de determined to be unlawful.
Um, and it retrospectively imposes that on beneficiaries
and a CC claimants and sensitive claimants abuse and clear
and care survivors who have done nothing wrong, uh,
in the process of of getting their a CC back pay.
Uh, this is a breach of the, of section 12
of the Legislation Act.
It's a breach of the, um,
legislative Defined Design Advisory Committee guidelines.
Uh, and it's a breach of the Regulatory Standards Act
and the re retrospective imposition of adverse obligations.
It, this bill really does present a genuine
threat to the rule of law.
Uh, it overalls the high courts legislative a legislative
interpreting role.
And we don't think that going back in time in the
retrospective way is appropriate in the circumstances.
We recommend that if the bill is to pass
that the retrospective nature of it is removed.
Furthermore, if it is going
to be retrospective in some nature, we recommend,
we recommend that the,
that Parliament consider the
importance of the savings clause.
Uh, it's appropriately recognized by, uh,
the Honorable Minister Louise Upson in her speech
to Parliament, that there's a savings clause
that prevents this bill from affecting active litigants
and the Appeals authority in the high court.
But it's really important to understand the way that the
benefit review process works.
You start off with a review of decision to Ms. D.
You say, I don't think that was correct. Ms.
D did their own internal review, which can take,
there's no legislative timeframe for that.
Then there's a benefit review committee,
which can take a long time.
It can take months or years.
And again, there's no legislative timeframe for that.
And then you get to appeal.
Once you get that decision, you
get to appeal to the authority.
There are a large number of people at that review
of decision and benefit review committee stage
who have never had the opportunity to review, to appeal
to the authority and should be considered for the purposes
of this bill as active litigants.
I have a particular client myself, who in May filed a review
of decision for her debt of $25,000
after her sensitive claim from a CC has been granted.
Um, and she has not been able to go any further than that
because we've been waiting for the high court
to make a decision that would affect her outcome.
So she should be considered an ACT active litigant
for the purposes of the savings clause.
Um, we note, as noted a few times, a lot
of people are sensitive claimants.
A lot of people are people who
have suffered child sexual abuse.
A lot of people are abusing state
care survivors or victims of crime.
And we recommend that the Select Committee
and Parliament consider excusing those people from having
to repay these debts as double punishment for those people.
I want to draw the select committee's, uh, attention
to Hannah Berg's submission.
Um, in reference to the tax treatment, uh, in April of last
of 2024, uh, tax treatment was, was changed
for the backpay of a CC.
It used to be that, uh, the IRD would consider
that you had received your entire weekly
compensation backpay in the year
that you actually received it rather than back allocating
for tax purposes to the years
that you should have received it from a CC resulting in a
large tax burden for that particular year.
Um, that is fixed now
and has been fixed from from April 1st, 2024.
But there is a double unfairness for those people
who received their money before then
because they are treated by IRD
as though they received the money in the year
that they received it, but by MSD
as though they received the monies in the year
that they ought to have received it for the purpose
of calculating their benefits.
Um, I also really want to note that there should be, and
because of the timeframes, um,
we're not sure if this can happen,
but there should be a special provision in this bill to say
that should a supplementary overpayment being created,
take someone means someone owes MC more than the total back
pay from a CC, so that they're actually losing out
by claiming a CC, that that should not be recovered.
I'm not sure if that is possible.
We haven't been able to, in the circumstances,
determine whether that can happen,
but it to be safe considering that the urgency with this,
which this is undertaken, that should be in the bill
happening, which is patently unfair.
And I don't think anyone on this
committee would agree it should happen.
Lastly, um, I wouldn't make the strong point
that there is real no, no need for urgency in this case.
Um, you know, the,
the bill has a clear deadline on which lit litigation has
to have been filed by, there's no reason
to have passed this bill with urgency.
Uh, it it, we strongly recommend that the Committee
and Parliament sit back
and take more time to consider this bill
to review the potential costs to MSD of Enforcement
and whether this is even worth pursuing, uh,
and the effects on beneficiaries and a c claimants
and the potential effects of the bill
and changes that might be made.
We'll take some questions if we've got time.
Thank you. Yeah, we've got a couple minutes.
I'll, I'll just, um, start just
with the constitutional question.
Um, 'cause you, uh, made a statement
that this is a threat to the rule of law.
Just can, can I just clarify, is your view
that the courts are superior to parliament
and that, uh, the long history of parliament's, um, uh,
re clarifying the law following court judgements, uh,
should, uh, is improper and, and should not continue?
Is that, is that what you're saying?
Sure. No, not at all.
Um, and so we recognize parliament's right,
to consider the law going forward.
Um, it's totally within parliament's right to do that.
It's the retrospective nature of this.
The way that the, the parliament,
this bill retrospectively changes the law
after a high court decision, uh, is the,
the constitutional issue that we raised.
Thanks for that clarification. Uh, Ricardo,
Thank you very much, um, for your a recommendations.
I wanted to go back to, um, outlining the groups
of people you believe this will disproportionately
affect now.
Um, would you be able to run us through some, I guess,
case studies or I guess examples of how long it can take
for someone who's, um, a sensitive claimant, um, some
of the evidence they have to produce
and the journey they have to go through, um, to be able
to get to an a CCC claim
and why it can take such a long time and why, and
and further to that, why you think they are people
who would have substantive amounts of debts compared to,
for example, other claimants,
Kiara? Um,
alright.
Um, so, well, one of the reasons is
that often takes a long time for the claim
to actually make it to a CC, just
because of the nature of sensitive claims.
A of the time people don't realize it can take time for them
to realize what has happened, uh, and make the claim.
Um, then there is also a long process
of psychiatric assessments, which a lot
of which can be quite re-traumatizing for people.
And it can take several years to get that process happen.
We, the, the big debts that we see are for people
who have been waiting for over 10 years, 10 15,
even 20 years for their a CC back pay.
Sometimes it's not accs fault, sometimes it's just the,
the way that this process works, the way it's been set out.
But that is the, the reality of the, the back pay.
Um, and those people have been living
in poverty that entire time.
They have been unable to work.
That's why they get the a CC back pay
and why they've been on the benefit.
They have been especially put negatively affected
because they have had very hard mental health disability
and, and effects during that time.
Um, they have also been paying for what we might say,
you know, could, should have been covered by a CC,
so things like therapy or, um, rehabilitative services.
So that would've been covered by disability allowance in
some situations by MSD
and it should have been covered by a CC.
So if they were on a C,
they would've had those rehabilitations covered
by a CC, they're not.
So they get it covered by disability allowance.
Um, it's a good note to consider that
that disability allowance is now being recollected
by the state when it should not have been,
because if they had been on a CC,
they would've had it covered.
So they're being double costed for that.
Um, one last quick question from Helen, just on mute.
Mute there, Helen.
Apologies. Um,
I am interested in your idea about the people, um, who, um,
we could go back and say, um, we're getting more, um, so
that, sorry, more than, um, they have been paid
and that you shouldn't, sorry, I'll just, yeah,
I'm interested in your suggestion,
but I wanna just take it one further spot.
When you've got people on really low incomes
and you've got people on high incomes earning accs,
you've got airline pilots, et cetera,
is there a possible differentiation there between people
who have collected a lot of money on a CC
because of the high income
and the lower income people in terms
of a possible change that you could see as being helpful?
Our experience at community law only
with that second category?
Yeah, so I'd say that we have any experience
with the, with the latter.
So, um, the, the high income people,
I'm not sure my colleagues, we could consider that
and come back to the committee in writing.
It's just I've, I've had people who are airline pilots
or even steel workers
who might be on 130,000 or even more now.
And so I can see a difference
because they're getting so much.
But what I do see is your need to really look
after that vulnerable category
who are gonna find the debt very burdensome.
Correct. No, no, thank, thank you.
We, we will, we, um, are over time now,
but, um, look, thank, thank you
for making the submission, uh, this morning.
Sure. Thank you. Thank
You. Alright,
we'll now move to, uh, AC Law.
Good morning Lauren, and welcome
to the Social Service Select Committee.
Uh, so we have you for, uh, 10 minutes this morning.
Um, just, um, noting that we are in public session
and asking that nothing that's actively been considered
before the courts be, uh, canvased at the hearing today,
but the the time is yours.
Thank you very much for giving me the opportunity to come
and present and, and just, I'd like to reiterate
how pleased I was that there was actually an opportunity
for this to go to select committee.
Quite a few colleagues of mine
and, uh, many of my clients would like
to have had made submissions,
but they couldn't due to the tight timeframes.
But I urge you to consider whether or not we should pause
and get this right until now.
There's been quite a clear dichotomy between the policy
that's previously been used
and the court's decision that that was unlawful.
And what I invite you to do is to sort of pause
and think about whether it actually, there's a middle ground
where some of the policy's, right, some
of the court's decisions, right?
And we need to actually stop and make sure we get this right
because this has been a problem for more than 20 years.
I've been involved in the jurisdiction
for more than 20 years.
So I oppose the retrospective, um, invalidation elements
of this bill on constitutional grounds largely.
Um, I've set out in my submissions in a lot of detail
analysis of the bill against the Regulatory Standards Act,
the legislation design advisory committee guidelines,
the Cabinet manual, and, uh, the Bill of Rights Act,
including the Human Rights Act.
Um, I'm not gonna take you through those in detail
because I think probably the best use of time is for me
to address a few particular things
and then, um, invite some questions.
Um, but my key recommendations, um, is that
we, we don't have a retrospective effect.
Um, any pros, any amendment should apply prospectively only.
And we should really think carefully about
how we can make sure that by go going through this process,
we aren't, uh,
deterring people from making legitimate claims
for cover and entitlements.
Um, and if there is going to be some, uh, continuation
as it stands, I think a few key ideas need
to be developed further, which is
grandparenting past entitlements.
Um, so we're not gonna go back
and address particular things capping, um,
a recovery at a specific amount.
So for example, no more than 80% of the payments, um,
from a CC can be repaid to MSD
or similar, um, inserting a, a repayment waiver provision.
So in the Accident Compensation Act at section,
I think it's 2 5 1, we have a provision that says, um,
A CC won't seek overpayments in particular circumstances
or repayments of overpayments in particular circumstances.
And they really go to equity.
So that takes it from a policy problem from your end to a,
a, a, an equity problem for someone to deal
with at a review stage.
Um, and the other option will be limiting the retrospective
effect to some particular date.
Um, so no one that I've spoken to has an objection
to people repaying MSD the main benefit they receive.
So that's clearly what should happen.
Then we move into this supplementary benefit, which is
what I understand this act to actually,
or this bill to address.
And that makes it a bit more complicated
because some of the, um,
supplementary benefits are sort of similar to income.
They fulfill a gap in the need of, of money to pay
for things like housing or, uh, or heating.
Um, and then some relate to disability related things.
So for example, if I'm seeing a counselor
or I'm paying for medication
or something else that's paid out of a disability allowance.
Now when a CC re um, gets to a point, someone's entitled,
this process in,
in my client's cases often takes more than 10 years.
So every few months we get a case that's backdated,
or every month really, um, 10, 20, 30 years.
Now these are people who should have had rehabilitation
and support from a CC at the get go,
and that would've completely changed
the direction of their lives.
But when it comes time to paying someone back, um,
if I'm a single person and I'm on low income
and then I, I meet someone along the way
and then I have, um, a relationship with that person, um,
we made both end up on, on winds payments.
Um, once I get my a CC entitlement sorted out, the whole of
that payment to me and my partner from winds is taken back
along with, um, quite a few other things.
And we get into a position where we're often paying back o
of a million dollar headline payment
and the person sometimes ends up with between 10
and $50,000.
Um, and, and that's quite a significant, um,
problem for the person.
Um, sometimes they end up with nothing as well.
Um, so, so what we have to do is to, to sit back
and think, well, is this what we intended?
So disability allowance, a CC should pay
that back from its pool of funds.
So if a CC was meant to pay me a hundred dollars in 1992,
they've invested that money, they've turned
that into something like seven
or $800 using return on investment.
So they've benefited very significantly
from having the money, but the demanding that I pay back
or my client pays back that the, the small amount, um,
from a system point of view,
but the large amount from the person's point of view
of disability allowance,
and that might be $40,000 over the last 10 or 12 years.
Now, a CC should pay that to wins,
but they should pay, pay it outta the budget that it has
to pay for treatment not outta
someone's weekly compensation.
And the same with heating.
Quite a few people who have nerve problems, um,
and other issues that relate to thermo regulation.
People have brain injuries,
they have a need to heat their house.
Now, a CC will pay that money normally
not from a person's entitlement,
but from the, the, the, the money a CC has set aside to pay
for that as a need related to their injury.
So what we are doing with this bill is
that we are collecting from someone's weekly compensation
entitlement, all of their injury related needs
that have been funded by MSD.
Now, my submission, that's wrong. Mm-hmm.
And this hasn't been something that I've seen any discussion
or debate about, but it is something
that we do need to consider.
So I've given there just a couple of examples.
Um, if we had the opportunity to actually get this right,
I would recommend that you put a small team
of people together who work through some of these options,
um, rather than push this bill through under urgency.
And I'll be very happy to help if would assist.
I don't for a minute suggest
that Parliament can't make this law.
It can. Um, and I fully acknowledge that,
but in the interest of actually trying
to get it right, I'm here to help.
And there's many others that would like
to actually assist the committee too.
So if there's time for questions, I'm happy
to answer any questions that anyone might have.
Oh, thank you Warren. Um, that's a helpful submission.
Um, if we, quick, quick fire questions.
One from Ricardo. One from Helen.
Thank you so much, Warren, for your submission.
Would you mind just expanding on the
issue in relationship to partners?
This is something I have raised myself, um,
and I just wanted to, to, um, just outline to the committee,
um, some further examples on how you see partners
of beneficiaries with a c claims
who are also in a benefit being impacted
and potentially being put in hardship
or in inequitable situations.
Okay. So if I am, if I'm entitled to $500 a week
of compensation and my, um,
partner rate on on support from MSD is $600 a week,
then I'm gonna repay all of my weekly compensation.
I'm gonna have nothing left.
Um, and again, if that's what the intent of the bill is
and that's what you want to do, great.
But just be clear that
that's actually what you're intending to do.
Thank you.
Thank you. Uh, Helen,
Um, I am really interested in, um, your comment that the,
um, AC CC therapy, et cetera, is normally on top.
Um, is that something that is explored at all in the theory
of the decision or is that actually an additional, uh,
kind of assumption that a CC uh, not taking into account?
So wouldn't they make a, a larger payment
to somebody who'd missed out for two years if they knew
that they had to include the therapy costs?
So the legislation's clear, it says A CC has
to refund MSD.
Yeah. It doesn't say it has
to come outta the person's compensation entitlement.
Right. Okay. So a C could top up
Absolutely. They could,
or a CC could say, Hey, MSD, when you're,
when you're asking us for all this money back,
please tell us how much relates to treatment.
Or please tell us why you paid this money so we can work out
what relates to treatment.
We'll pay the income replacement bit out
of someone's compensation,
but the other bit, let's actually pay that out of the pool
of funds we normally fund treatment out of.
Now that's very straightforward,
Right? That's
why you want a little team doing it
because they have,
that's why you want a little team doing it.
'cause they have to ask the question. Yep.
Find the answer and recalculate. Yeah.
And what I'm suggesting is, if you want
to actually make this bill work properly, get a group
of people together who have the
experience and we can make it work.
Gotcha. Thank you. Thank you, Warren.
You raised some interesting points
and we'll, we'll take some more advice.
For example, the point you made around, um, needs related
to injury, maybe crossing over with, you know,
water costs for heathing, et cetera.
Uh, so, uh, um, it, it's, um, helpful submission.
Appreciate your time this morning. Thank you. Thank you.
Alright, we now move on to physio New Zealand pelvic health.
Uh, Dr. Dr. Melissa.
Hi. I'm not sure if you can see me or not.
Yes, no, we can. Yep.
Um, basically just popping in and out a little bit there,
but No, we can, we can see you and we can hear you.
So look, we've got 10 minutes with you this morning, Dr.
Melissa. So, um, you've probably heard, heard the preamble,
um, time is yours.
Okay, great. Well, thank you
for the opportunity to make the submission.
Um, I'm Dr. Melissa Davidson.
I'm a consultant, specialist physiotherapist in public
health and a clinical educator
for health professionals in New Zealand and internationally.
I'm currently the only registered specialist physio in
New Zealand, um, in public health.
And over many years, I've represented physiotherapy,
New Zealand physiotherapists
and patients across multiple government, uh, platforms,
including the a CC expert advisory group
for maternal birth injuries, ministry of health, um,
women's health strategy team,
and the National Quorum, um, for maternal health.
I'm here today because I do have concerns
about this amendment Bill.
My first concern is about the use of urgency.
Um, passing this bill urgently leaves insignificant time
to understand its full impact, particularly on women
with maternal birth injuries and people with lower health
and systems literacy.
When the legislation moves faster than understanding,
the harm does not feel all equally.
It falls on those least able to absorb it.
And in the maternal births injury space,
there are systematic failures occurring daily.
A CC claims have been declined
or taking many months to be accepted through no fault
of the woman themselves.
And the delays are often caused by a CC processes
and the health system failures not by missing eligibility.
The consequences are profound.
These women are recovering from a birth injury,
they're healing physically and psychologically.
They're caring for a new baby
or a little alien, as I like to call them,
often on capped maternity leave incomes.
And in doing so in a culture
that doesn't really support women to recover,
and New Zealand women put their families
first and themselves last.
When supplementary assistant is
provided, it's meant to cover essential costs.
But the reality of living with a birth injury includes far
more than just water rates, power, food.
It also includes treatment, co-payments for the injury
to get treatment for recovery, transport to
and from appointments, childcare
to attend those appointments.
If they can't bring the baby
and basic medical resources such as continence projects
and pads, scar management supplies and equipment,
and they face a higher living cost while living on reduced
incomes, we then asking them to repay costs
that they reasonably believe are covered.
And it places them under additional psychological,
physiological, uh, physiology, physical
and financial stress.
Again, through no fault of their own.
My second major concern is those who the system works for.
Our health and benefit systems are built on Western
bureaucratic logic.
But New Zealand is culturally
and ethically eth ethnically diverse
with a wide range in values, priorities,
and understanding of money, obligations, and authority.
And unless you understand the system,
you are already disadvantaged.
And I say some this as somebody
with multiple postgraduate graduate qualifications,
master's degree, PhD, and I'm a clinical specialist.
So I have the health understanding
and even I struggle to understand our health
and a CC processes, decision making, logic entitlements,
and the shifting rules that occur often on a daily basis.
So I ask the committee, how are people
with lower health literacy expected
to navigate the system That says, we'll help you now,
but then we may take it back later.
And that's what this bill is proposing.
Instead of investing time, effort,
and money into an urgent amendment bill, I urge you
to fix the system wide processes within a CC
and stop the people falling off the cliff.
And then you don't need to be the debt
collector at the bottom.
This bill does not fix the problem.
It puts a bandaid over systematic dysfunction.
And I finally want to highlight a deeper issue
during another a c, C
and maternal birth injury review process, including with mb.
I was repeatedly asked to find
or estimate basic data, including a rough sense of
how many PE women suffer these injuries per year
so we can calculate the claim rate and cost to the system
and present that data to the minister.
This reveals a lack
of robust evidence-based data across a CC, ministry
of Health and Health New Zealand,
and yet decisions have been made
that have significant long-term consequences.
Regardless of that flawed data or logic.
This bill risks increasing harm
to already vulnerable women increasing in inequality
and shifting the burden
of system failure onto the
individuals who did nothing wrong.
So I urge you to slow this process down,
fix the upstream failures,
and ensure that any change reduces harm,
then redistributing it to the individuals.
Thank you.
Thank you Dr. Melissa. We have our time
for a question from Ricardo.
Thank you so much for your submission, Melissa.
Um, we've heard from me members of both sides, um,
that this is about equity.
Um, yet submitters have mentioned quite the exact opposite.
Do you believe that this bill as it stands
actually is about equity?
No, I think it's about, um,
to put it bluntly, the the pool
of money comes outta the same place.
It comes out of our taxes.
And a CC doesn't wanna pay Ministry of Health,
doesn't wanna pay Ministry
of social development, doesn't wanna pay.
Let's look beyond that
and let's look at the people actually affected
and what will work for them in maternal birth space.
Um, you've got over 60,000 women giving birth a year.
A up to 85 to 90% of those women will suffer some kind
of birth injury,
and yet they're fighting over payments for physiotherapy.
I don't actually see a CC patients.
I've got no financial gain to be presenting here.
Um, uh, but I'm representing wider than that
because of my qualifications.
Um, so you've got all these women coming through the system
who are not being treated as a rugby player, for example,
or a tennis player
or a sailor who breaks his leg on a boat, you know, um,
they're not being treated.
And a, a huge amount of it also is cultural, you know,
uh, birthing injuries.
The taboo around pelvic health is huge.
You know, you mentioned vagina, penises, vulvas to women
or men, and they all go cringe.
I'm pretty sure a few of you're cringing right now.
The further fact I said vagina in, in public.
Um, but it's a taboo subject that needs
to be diminished completely.
Um, and we all have them and various forms
and we all have major problems.
You know, a third of women will leak after childbirth.
50% of women will develop a prolapse.
Um, it's not just affecting women,
but it affects men as well.
But the woman, the burden is placed on them.
And culturally, if they don't talk about their public
health, they're not gonna seek help.
So they're not going to get any income, any, uh, supplement
for the incontinence products or anything else.
Thank you. They won't, they won't get help.
Thank you. Uh, Willie, uh, where am I? Thank you.
Thank you, Melissa, for your, uh, quarter or today.
So when you talk about culturally,
what are you, what are you saying?
Are you saying it's a, there's a real ethnic, um,
uh, area here?
Or it it yes. Or disproportionately being affected?
Are you saying that? Yes, in terms
Of Yeah. Ethnic
Marion? Yeah, maam.
Pacifica will not come forward with health,
public health issues, maternal birth space.
We know that they are underrepresented already.
Um, we would know that there is lower socioeconomic
burden on those who, um, uh,
either ethnically wise
or culture wise, they won't seek help.
And we look, gotta look at our health model.
Um, our health model is very western.
Um, it is not any way diverse to count
for other components of health.
Um, even with a CC bringing in, um, uh,
some coverage for Maori health practices, um,
the access isn't there for that.
So women are not being told right at the time, um,
you are covered under a CC
and the philosophy has been, oh,
if they're struggling then they'll seek help.
But nine outta 10 women will not seek help
because of embarrassment, shame, um, et cetera.
Then they don't return to work. So they're, you know,
and you know, one
of our major health problems is we've got cancer,
we've got cardiovascular, we've got diabetes,
we've got mental health.
This is sort of the four majors,
and yet all of those, if their pelvic health is compromised,
the major, uh, treatment as such is exercised.
We want these people exercising,
we want them getting out there.
We want our diabetes,
we want our cardiovascular people exercising.
If they're prolapsing,
if their bits are falling out their vagina,
if they've got incontinence
and they leak, they're not going to exercise.
So we need to address the whole system
and we need to stop having a look from a western point
of view and look more diverse.
Um, and account for the fact that yes, I talk about vaginas
and penises quite openly,
but in a marai I would change my wording
because, um, you know, it, it's not
as culturally appropriate.
However, I do get called auntie a lot, um,
and get a lot of humor out of it because I'm very blunt
and very upfront front with people.
Um, but yeah, I do think there is, if this bill goes
through on urgency, what what is the urgency around this?
You know, why is this so urgent?
Why do we not take some time to look at this and do it?
Right?
Uh, thank you. Thank you Melissa. I just ask a question
'cause I, you've raised some, some, uh,
I think important points around the, um, broader sort
of challenges, uh, for, um, women who, you know, give birth
and um, and the injuries that come from that.
Just in respect of this bill,
it's focused on something reasonably discreet, which is, um,
trying to, to ensure a longstanding policy position
that there's for want of, you know, for simplistic terms,
there's no double dipping, um, from, in terms of people who,
um, could get a, a benefit or people who could get a CC
and that, you know, there's not,
some people get more than o
other people in the same position.
I just, what, what is, uh, your, uh,
specific concern about this bill?
The, the essential costs, um,
that are put down there.
You know, everybody mentions heating and food and rent.
What about continence problems? Products?
What about the actual healthcare needs
for the people under a CC?
They might be able to access it.
They can take months and months
and then getting chlorine
that back from them is very difficult to do.
Um, so you are talking
that they're gonna use some money on this essential, um,
costs for these products,
but they're not gonna get it back out of a CC.
Um, and so they're,
they're gonna be spending quite a lot of money.
I mean, I dunno, when you guys last looked at continence
products, but they're quite expensive
and you're talking going through six,
eight pads a day, for example.
Um, or going and purchasing, um, underwear that works that,
but again, that whole taboo around it.
So they'll be sneaking money and not paying for food to try
and cover continent products
and then you're gonna take that away from them
and where are they gonna find that money?
A C C's not gonna backdate that.
Just to get that out
of a CC at the moment is a huge struggle.
Um, you know, getting approval, get a purchase order
for continence products, et cetera, et cetera.
They give up, the women give up
and they just go and buy them themselves.
So taking away that essential supplementary
will affect them negatively.
No, that's, that's helpful. Thank you very much,
uh, for your submission this morning. You're
Welcome. Thank you.
Alright, uh, members, we will, um, suspend until, uh,
10 30.